Rather, where the record has not been disturbed.
Yes, I'm sorry, where the record has not been
disturbed. Yes, that is true in a sense.
What we've been trying to do in our group is to
establish phenomena as a function of time, the
record of the past history. Okay, then what are
some of the things you've discovered then which
have modified beliefs about, let's say, the
origin of the oceans?
Well,
anything that we've done that has a bearing on that
subject
is most closely associated with this question
that lies much further back in time, the question
of how matter originally formed, how solid matter
originally formed in the solar system. And those
questions decide essentially where the water
eventually came from that later on formed the
ocean. So
in that field, it's very hard to make any really
breakthroughs or major discoveries. You
work with little details in the record that is very
scanty. so limited that it's open for many
different interpretations. And what you can do is
to essentially see how this record fits with the
actual observations of reality today. The field
is very full of speculation. And
there are many people very interested in the
question of the earliest history of the solar
system. What characterizes much of this work is
that it's split up between people in different
fields, chemists, physicists, geologists, who
work kind of separately on these things. And each
one of them have a theory for the origin of the solar
system, one for chemists, another one for
physicists, a third one for geologists. And they
are rather, since there's strangely enough
little contact between them
it's very rare that these different theories are
confronted with each other and people find that
there are where geologists thought some things
were possible or likely physical laws of how
matter behaves in space prohibit that and negates
such a theory and what I've been interested in
essentially is to work together with, try to join
information of the type that I'm particularly
interested in with the information that can come
from other fields. And the collaboration that I
have particularly treasured and learned much
from is with the outstanding physicist professor
Hannes Alvén. And together we have tried to
develop some, I wouldn't even call it theories,
but a framework for the permitted range of
interpretations of the past history of the solar
system on the basis of the boundaries of the limits
that are imposed by physical and chemical laws,
essentially.
That is essentially the contribution as far as I
see it in that particular field.
Exactly what is the framework around which you
sketch, let's say, the origin of the universe?
That is a very interesting philosophical
question. There again, there are very different
departures taken by different people through
time. One is that very commonly that you have a
brilliant idea of some kind you're fascinated by
some specific phenomenon and you say wouldn't it
be interesting to see if you can use that to explain
a specific phenomenon to explain things in the
past
I think what one finds is generally that human
knowledge and human human rationalization is
very very limited And if you base your approach to
the history of the past on speculations without
contact with reality, then you're bound. Even if
you're very smart, after a few steps, the chances
that you'll go wrong is very, very high. This is the
basis of existentialism, essentially. And I'm an
existentialist. Therefore, I think that
scientists, as well as other human beings need
very badly to be guided by reality. And the reality
in this case is the situation. If you're
interested in the conditions in space in the past,
then you have to ask yourself, what are the
processes going on in space today? What are the
laws that govern the motion and state of matter in
space today? And there, of course, a whole new that
we didn't know very much at all 20 years ago. All
kinds of beliefs then prevailed that are
completely obsolete today. People thought that
this interstellar space was a void, near vacuum,
whereas now one knows it's a thin medium that is
strongly electrified like northern lights,
roughly, full of a network of currents and
magnetic fields. In the same way, the chemical
ideas about interplanetary and interstellar
space in olden days was one of
such a nothingness and in between clouds of gas.
These gases were believed to be behaviors like
gases in the laboratory on Earth. That one is
commonly used. And this is where the space
exploration opened up a completely new new
experimental field demonstrated how completely
wrong people were. That instead of neutral gases
dominating the picture, you find that
just very small degrees of ionization in these
gases cause them to behave fundamentally
differently from the ordinary gas dynamics laws.
And it's the laws of plasma physics and the laws of
magneto-hydrodynamics that govern the behavior
of matter in space. And this is where I felt that
collaboration with Professor Alvén was
particularly informative
for me, because he is one of the founders of the
modern science of magnetohydrodynamics, and one
of the pioneers in the understanding of how things
actually behave in space,
in a way that's based on speculation, but in a way
that's based on observation.
Is US spending enough money on its space program?
That is very hard to say. I think the space program
consists and has consisted of two things, science
and public relations in the international arena.
And for example, the lunar program, the manned
landings on the moon, were entirely, I think the
justification politically for it, were not the
advancement of science. Science got a free ride
there on the publicity stunt undertaken at a very
grandiose scale by the United States. to impress
the world with what is possible with modern
technology.
And
in that program, science in the beginning was
perhaps not thought of as the major purpose. It
became quite well-funded during the great era
when this played an important role in the eyes of
the world. The problem with such a background for
scientific support is that when the publicity
interest has dropped, people's attention span is
very short, then that tends also to be a dropping
interest in political support for scientific
work in the field. And this is where at the present
time, where there is needed to carry on a sustained
exploration of space around us, not just for
publicity, or not only for philosophical
reasons, to express it in a more favorable way, but
also for the understanding of nature and of the
processes that ultimately have to do with
everyday life on Earth. Do you judge NASA to be too
mission-oriented? NASA has to be very
mission-oriented, because the great
breakthroughs that NASA has made are due to
missions. So not at all. No, I think that is the
lifeblood of modern space science, is actual
expeditions into space. They don't need to be
manned, and some of the more exciting
explorations will be probably undertaken in the
near future by unmanned spacecraft. The orbiting
space station around the moon, the polar orbiter
that is hoped for, and
parallelly, I would hope, the exploration of
comets and asteroids, small bodies in the solar
system, which hold the secret to the origin of the
solar system, in contrast to the planets and the
moon that can't give any information about that.
Why do comments hold the secret to the solar
system? Well, I think it generally agreed on that
the solar system formed from gas and dust, but
perhaps hasn't dawned on everybody yet the state
that this gas and dust was in and what specific laws
that follow when they form, but the general
understanding is there. And when such gas and dust
clumps up together to form clumps of larger and
larger size that grow and eventually form bodies
as large as planets, the gravitation is so strong
and the forces become so strong in these bodies
that they destroy their original record. The
Earth has destroyed totally the record of the
structure and composition of the original
material it was made from. It has remelted itself
and is continuing to remelt its crust, at least,
and spew out the remelted rocks as volcanic
eruptions. The same on any big planets, like
Venus. Mars is kind of halfway through that
process. It is more youthful, maybe, than the
Earth. all of the original material is certainly
totally destroyed. And any time you land some
little chunk of original material on such a big
body, just because it smashes into the surface so
hard, it is destroyed. Unless you have an
atmosphere like the Earth, that makes it possible
for meteorites to have soft landing. So the bodies
then that haven't grown big enough to destroy this
material The small planets, the minor planets,
the so-called asteroids that cruise around
mostly in orbit in space, mostly between Mars and
Jupiter, and also the comets that have come from
way out in the outer reaches of the solar system and
come in close to the sun and go back out again.
There's quite a lot of evidence that they consist
of material that has been very little altered from
its original state. What is information science,
by the way? Information science is everything
that has to do with modern computers, data, data
processing. Okay. Well, what relationship does
information science have to do with your work?
It's only a tool in all modern science, or in much of
modern science. You are aided very much by
computers and by the whole science that is behind
computers. But it's not only the everyday . It's a
question of signal processing, the way you convey
information in an electromechanical sense and
also in the widest sense. information by
communication between people. And what have you
tried to do as associate director of the Institute
for Pure and Applied Physical Sciences? Well,
that institute is essentially an outgrowth of the
original Institute for the Study of Matter under
Professor Mathias' direction. By merging with
some other similarly oriented organizations,
essentially this Institute for Pure and Applied
Physical Sciences, originally created by
Professor Keith Bruckner, one of our great
physicists on this campus and our international
team, joined together with the Institute for
Study of Matter and formed this new structure. And
what I've been doing there is partly to to try to
draw together into that type of, the different
types of research efforts that were going on in
that field on this campus and to assist
essentially in the effort by Professor Mathias in
doing that. Okay, and when you say draw together
the different kinds of research going on on this
campus, do you mean draw together the different
kinds of research on this campus and apply it to
space? There is not, well, so much in space
sciences. In this case, it's mostly in material
science. It's a material science effort that is
handled by that
institute.
Is it possible to, let's say, harness that
enthusiasm that appeared for the original space
program and turn it towards the oceans?
How do you mean, in Washington? In Washington and
with the general public. I don't see why one
should. It's like saying you should,
well, to turn the interest, the legitimate
profound interest in one field of science into the
equally legitimate and interesting work in
another field of science. There's no reason why
one should be converted into another. They're
both justified on their own and tie in with each
other. But there's only so much of a pool, let's
say, of research monies available to the academic
world. Do you feel as if, as a man who operates in
both fields, may I put you on the spot here, do you
feel as if we should continue with space as a major
priority, or should the major priority become
oceans, or should we have no major priority? Oh, I
think we are far from the point where the amount of
funds going into science, fundamental and
applied science in this country, are limited by
the resources of this nation. I mean, it's just to
compare the magnitudes. The amount that went into
the space program during its heydays was really
costing money because of the tremendous
engineering efforts. That amount is less than
people spend on smoking in the United States per
year, and less than spent on cosmetics every year.
It's nothing compared to the Greengrass National
Project, compared to what is spent on armament and
weapons. It's a very, very small fraction. And
that, yet, was the largest effort in science at
that time. the other branches of science, is a
small fraction of that again. So this country is
devoting a very small fraction of its gross
national product to the creation of new
knowledge, which is essential for the future of
the nation.
That leads me to another series of questions,
which I'd like you to make invidious comparisons,
if you don't mind. I'm happy to make invidious
comparisons. All right. Vis-a-vis, let's say,
your original home of Scandinavia, how would you
rank American scientific efforts? Does one
receive a better or a worse education in
Scandinavia in terms of the sciences as a
professional? That's a very broad, it's like
saying our earthlings better or worse than
Martians. I think it's
easy to speak about the education you receive or
scientific training you receive in Sweden or in
Norway or in Denmark because these are small,
homogeneous societies which
correspond in size, in geographic size, to
California, for example, in Sweden.
where you have, therefore, rather unified
structures in education. In the United States,
that's a continent. You have an enormous variety
of standards and of institutions ranking from
completely worthless to the most outstanding in
the world. And the great institutions in this
country are unparalleled anywhere in the world.
What about work and activity in, let's say,
oceanography? First, would you estimate that the
United States is on par with, let's say, the
oceanographic institutions of the other
affluent countries in terms of science? Let's say
Germany, the Soviet Union, and the Scandinavian
countries. I would say in each of these groups, and
particularly the ones, the wealthier nations
that are so large that they can afford a massive
effort. Scandinavian countries don't belong
there. Their effort in these expensive fields
must necessarily be limited and spotty, limited
to certain periods of time when there's a giant
effort, like in the 1880s or in the 1940s during the
great expeditions that were undertaken then. In
the United States and in the USSR, Germany,
France, there can be sustained efforts. And the
sustained effort in the United States is
undergoing a very strong change right now. In the
USSR, it is continuing in the traditional way. And
in the USSR, everything is very structured.
The effort that has gone into has been very
extensive. Their ships are just perfect,
excellent ships. If not designed for the purpose
or selected, ships are selected for the purpose
that are very expensive to roam, that serve the
purpose very well, that makes it possible for
people to stay at sea for very long times. The
Russian ships are roaming all the portions of the
sea and people stay out for very long times. In the
United States, I would say the effort is probably
much more imaginative. But from the point of view
of ships facilities, one has depended on the Navy
essentially during the initial era, during the
40s and 50s and 60s.
The ships have characteristically either been
local donations by some millionaire who wanted to
get rid of a yacht, and in the better cases, ships
placed at disposal by the U.S. Navy, but that have
to be on call all the time, and therefore could not
be modified for their original use, turgs, rescue
vessels, things like that. We've also, so that has
marred the efficiency of the US oceanographic
fleet. Then there's been a period during which
ships, some of the ships, were designed actually
for oceanographic purposes. But my regard for
most of these designers is not very high.
The
results are not really vessels that are
characterized by the utmost in modern
engineering and skill, but rather, I mean, some of
them rather amateurishly done and become rather
rapidly outdated. Many of them have low speeds and
therefore can't achieve so much at any given time.
And also I think the Puritan aspect of the American
society prevents the creation on board of
comfortable quarters for the crew and for the
scientific crew and for the
sailors and officers, it somehow goes against the
grain. People should be comfortable on board. As a
result, in contrast, for example, on the Russian
ship, people live in great luxury, but in great
comfort.
That, I think, has... As a result of that, you can
never keep people on board on the macro ship for a
long time. As a result, you have to fly them out to
wherever to change crew all the time, every six
weeks or so, and it becomes very, very costly to
exchange crews. And also, to keep morale high on
board is very difficult because of the rather
limited comfort and... That is deplorable in a
way. How many oceanographic voyages have you
made? Oh, I've lost track of them. Nowadays, I go
out very rarely. But the major expeditions
lasting for some considerable time, half a dozen
or so.